= Installation of binary distribution of Java application comFramework codeGenerator

== Installation of Java runtime

Please note, that this installation step is shared with the installation
of excelExporter, comFramework's auxiliary code generator. You don't need
to do this twice, if you are going to use both tools.

The code generator belonging to project comFramework is a stand-alone Java
application. An installed Java runtime environment of version 8 (aka 1.8)
or higher is a prerequisite of running the code generator. If such a Java
RTE is in your system's search path for executables then you can skip this
step. Even setting environment variable `COMFRAMEWORK_JAVA_HOME` (see
below) is not a must; if you don't do then the Java executable from the
search path will be used.

If no suitable Java RTE is available in your system's search path, then
you can get an appropriate Java Open JDK at
https://jdk.java.net/23/ (Nov 2024). Download the archive (e.g.,
https://download.java.net/java/GA/jdk23.0.1/c28985cbf10d4e648e4004050f8781aa/11/GPL/openjdk-23.0.1_windows-x64_bin.zip
for Windows x64 users).

Unzip the Java archive to a location of your choice and consider adding
this location to the operating system's search path. Either the Java
executable, java.exe, needs to be in the Windows search path or the Java
installation path -- where `bin\java.exe` is located in -- is assigned to
a new environment variable `COMFRAMEWORK_JAVA_HOME`. Given, you're Java
executable would be `c:\ProgramFiles\jdk-23.0.1\bin\java.exe`, then you
could issue the command:

    setx COMFRAMEWORK_JAVA_HOME c:\ProgramFiles\jdk-23.0.1

from a Command Prompt window. Please note, that the proposed command will
install the new environment variable only for the current user. A machine
wide setting by putting /m at the end of the command line requires
administrator rights.

== Unzip the comFramework archive

If not already done for the installation of excelExporter, you would now
unzip the comFramework archive to a location of your choice. Installation
paths containing blanks must be avoided.

The installation path of comFramework's code generator (i.e., a path like
`...\comFramework\codeGenerator`, where folder `dist` is located in) is
assigned to a new environment variable `COMFRAMEWORK_CODEGENERATOR_HOME`.
The script that launches the Java application, will set the Java class
path based on this root directory. Java will fail to locate the required
jar files if the environment variable is not properly set. Given, you'd
copied the archive's contents to the folder `c:\ProgramFiles`, then you
could issue the command:

    setx COMFRAMEWORK_CODEGENERATOR_HOME c:\ProgramFiles\comFramework\codeGenerator

from a Command Prompt window. Please note, that the proposed command will
install the new environment variable only for the current user. A machine
wide setting by putting /m at the end of the command line requires
administrator rights.

The application launcher is a Windows script named `codeGenerator.cmd`. It
is located in the folder `codeGenerator\dist`. It's a very simple script
and Linux and Mac OS users won't have any problems to write the same
script in their respective shell script languages. The script becomes most
useful if the folder dist is added to the system search path (i.e.,
environment variable `PATH` would be extended by
`c:\ProgramFiles\comFramework\codeGenerator\dist` in the example above).
Consider typing:

    pathman /au c:\ProgramFiles\comFramework\codeGenerator\dist

in a Command Prompt window. Please note, that the proposed command will
extend the Windows search path only for the current user. A machine wide
setting by putting `/as` instead of `/au` requires administrator rights.

Alternatively, the tiny script `codeGenerator.cmd` can be copied to all
locations where the code generator is about to be used.

== Test your installation

If you decided to extend your `PATH` variable then you should test your
installation by opening a _new_ shell window -- the Windows configuration
settings made by commands `setx` and `pathman` are not adopted by the
shell instance, which they are submitted from. In the new shell, `cd` to
an arbitrary working directory and submit the command:

    codeGenerator.cmd --help

The application should start up and it should respond with its usage
text.

From the same shell, `cd` to sample `raceTechnology`, i.e., folder
`...\codeGenerator\samples\raceTechnology. Type:

    generateCode
    
`generateCode` is a small wrapper script with the command line appropriate
for this sample. The code generator is run and should properly reproduce
the generated files, which already were in the ZIP archive. Inspect folder
`output` to see.